MALCOLM Turnbull is battling to save his leadership as the gutted government waits to see if it has been returned.

The quest for political stability has been spectacularly denied by Saturday’s election, which has magnified uncertainty possibly for years to come.

Deputy Leader of the Opposition Tanya Plibersek was quick to question Mr Turnbull’s future, with his authority in tatters.

“I think the real question tonight is for Malcolm Turnbull — can he remain leader with the loss of so many seats? That’s the real question for tonight,” she told the Nine Network.

However Senator Eric Abetz, who is a staunch supporter of former prime minister Tony Abbott, said he assumed Mr Turnbull would have the backing to continue in the top job.

The veteran Tasmanian politician, who lost his cabinet spot and role as leader of the government in the upper house when the party switched from Mr Abbott to Mr Turnbull, said he was confident in the elected parliamentary leader.

“People will have their own idea as to whether or not Mr Abbott or Mr Turnbull is a better campaigner — the simple fact is we will never know and that has passed us by and what we have are the results that were delivered,” Senator Abetz told reporters in Hobart this morning.
Malcolm Turnbull was all smiles when he left his Point Piper home in Sydney this morning. Picture: Cameron Richardson


IT IS the morning after an extraordinary election and the dust still hasn’t settled.

Vote counting has been stopped and won’t resume until Tuesday — yes, Tuesday — leaving the fate of the nation effectively on hold while everyone takes a breather.

With a 3.3 per cent swing against the Coalition, the country is facing the very real possibility of another hung parliament. Here’s what we know so far.

WHO IS WINNING?

With less than 80 per cent of the vote counted, the Coalition and Labor both have 67 seats. To form government, you need 76 seats.

Eleven seats are in doubt. The Coalition is ahead in five of those seats, while Labor leads in six. The other five seats have been won by two independents, one Greens MP, Bob Katter, and one from Nick Xenophon’s party.

The seats in doubt are Capricornia, Chisolm, Cowan, Dickson, Dunkley, Forde, Gilmore, Herbert, Hindmarsh, La Trobe and Petrie. The Coalition is ahead in Dickson, Dunkley, Gilmore, La Trobe and Petrie.
Senator Nick Xenophon is celebrating already. Picture: Brenton Edwards)

WHY HAS THE VOTE COUNTING STOPPED?

Counting stopped at 2am on Sunday morning and will not resume until Tuesday. On the night of the election, the Australian Electoral Commission only counts “ordinary votes” from polling places.

That means first preference and two-candidate-preferred votes for House of Representatives ballot papers, and first preferences for the Senate ballot papers.

The AEC says it has counted more than 11 million House of Representatives votes.

Counting of absentee and postal votes is carried out in the week after election day. This year, about 2.5 million people cast their votes early.

After counting stopped on Sunday, all ballots will now be sent to secure locations in each electorate for counting.

This was one of the recommendations of a review into the bungled WA Senate vote in 2013, which saw 1370 ballots go missing, forcing a fresh election and leading to the resignation of the head of the AEC.

“The AEC’s focus today [Sunday] is on the declaration vote exchange,” the AEC said in a statement.

“The declaration vote exchange is where the large numbers of absent, interstate, postal and other declaration votes are reconciled, sorted and packaged ready for dispatch to the home division from Monday.

“Only once the declaration votes are received and processed in the home division can the counting of these votes begin. Any counting today will be limited to the small numbers of votes collected by AEC mobile teams.

“On Monday, the AEC will continue the process of verifying more than one million postal votes already returned to the AEC so that they can be admitted to the count beginning on Tuesday.”

The AEC says while that is going on, the count of pre-poll Senate votes and “any remaining House of Representatives ordinary pre-poll votes not already counted on Saturday” may resume on Monday.

WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?



Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull says he is "quietly confident" the Coalition will secure enough votes to form a majority government, and is reaching out to crossbenchers as the prospect of a hung parliament looms.
Key points:

    Turnbull expects postal and absentee votes to deliver the Coalition a majority government
    Shorten says Coalition should find "common ground" with Labor
    Both leaders reach out to crossbenchers, who could be kingmakers in hung parliament

The Government suffered a 2.8 per cent swing against it at the election, and as of Sunday afternoon had won 65 seats to Labor's 67, with 13 remaining in doubt.

Counting resumes on Tuesday, and while the Australian Electoral Commission cannot say when a result will be known, Mr Turnbull is confident of a resolution by the end of this week.

"Like all of us, Australians would have no doubt preferred a clearer outcome last night," the Prime Minister said, adding: "I remain quietly confident that a majority Coalition government will be returned."
Crossbench power

8 key players who could swing a hung parliament

Pauline Hanson

Early numbers indicate a strong showing for Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party.

The controversial former MP is on track to pick up at least one Queensland seat in the Senate.

Ms Hanson says she wants to see more maturity and less fighting in Parliament.
Jacqui Lambie

It is predicted the Burnie-based Senator will be returned to represent Tasmania.

A ReachTel poll result published in the Mercury showed a boost of support for her such that her running mate, Steve Martin, might get the 12th Senate seat.

Ms Lambie formed the Jacquie Lambie Network in 2015.
Derryn Hinch

Former broadcaster and 'human headline' Derryn Hinch has claimed a Senate seat in Victoria.

He says he plans to continue his justice campaign, calling for the establishment of a national register of sex offenders.

The Derryn Hinch Justice Party was formed this year and has two Senate candidates standing in all states.
Rebekha Sharkie

Nick Xenophon Team's Rebekha Sharkie has won the South Australian seat of Mayo.

She has taken what was considered a very safe Liberal seat from former frontbencher Jamie Briggs.

NXT is also tipped to win three Senate seats.
Bob Katter

The leader of Katter's Australian Party easily won his rural seat of Kennedy in north Queensland, gaining a swing of more than 11 per cent on first preference votes.

Mr Katter says he is already working on a list of demands to put to the major parties in the face of a hung parliament and is keen to talk to other crossbench MPs as soon as possible.
Cathy McGowan

The independent has claimed victory in the seat of Indi for the second time after taking it from Liberal MP Sophie Mirabella in 2013.

Ms McGowan has ruled out doing any deals to help the Coalition or Labor form government.
Adam Bandt

Greens MP Adam Bandt has claimed victory in the seat of Melbourne for the third federal election in a row.

Following the 2010 election, which resulted in a hung parliament, Mr Bandt along with three independents decided to support a Labor minority government.
Andrew Wilkie

The independent member for the Tasmanian seat of Denison has retained his seat for a third term.

The number of votes for Mr Wilkie is currently around double of those for Labor candidate Jane Austin.

Mr Wilkie has said he will not be making any deals to help the Coalition or Labor form government.

He said he believed postal ballots and pre-poll votes would get the Coalition over the line.

"Now, as you know, our experience is that these postal votes and pre-poll votes, indeed, traditionally favour Liberal and National Party candidates, especially when they are incumbents," Mr Turnbull said.

"So, if that trend were to be manifest again here, that is likely to deliver majority government to the Coalition, but time will tell."

If the Coalition winds up with fewer than 76 seats, it would need to negotiate with independents and minor parties to stay in power.

Crossbench and independent MPs could prove kingmakers in that scenario, and the Prime Minister confirmed he had opened lines of communication with them.

He said he would work to ensure the "state of new Parliament is resolved without division or rancour".

"What we will do is ensure that we work constructively and effectively with all of the members of the new Parliament to ensure that we deliver the stability and the leadership that Australians expect," Mr Turnbull said.

Opposition Leader Bill Shorten said Mr Turnbull's policies were the "clear loser" of the double dissolution election, which he said had delivered "anything but stability" for the nation.

He has also spoken with crossbenchers, and said the key message was that they "want to be constructive".

"They don't want Australia rushing back to the polls. I certainly don't," Mr Shorten said.
Shorten urges Coalition to find common ground with Labor

Mr Shorten stressed Labor would stand by its promise not to form a coalition agreement with the Greens, and said the Coalition should try to find "common ground" with him.

"If Mr Turnbull would go back to being the centrist he used to be before he rolled Tony Abbott, I have no doubt there is some common ground we can work with them," he said.

"It should not beyond the pale of the Liberals to look at what they can do together with the Labor Party.

    "Australians want leaders to act like leaders, not partisans."

Independents Andrew Wilkie and Cathy McGowan have ruled out doing any deals to help either major party, but Bob Katter has said he is drawing up a wish list for negotiations.

Nick Xenophon was not speculating on any power sharing arrangement, while Greens Leader Richard Di Natale indicated he was ready to negotiate, saying: "The mobile is charged and I'm waiting for the call and we'll deal with that in the coming days."

Mr Shorten rejected the suggestion he may face a leadership challenge from frontbencher Anthony Albanese, despite the stronger-than-expected election result for Labor.

"My crew understand the importance of unity. I have never been more certain of my position, and if you want to talk leadership, have a go with my friends in the Liberal Party," he said.

"Have you seen Tony Abbott out today? Has Mr Turnbull said he will put Mr Abbott in his Shadow Cabinet?"

The Prime Minister hosed down the suggestion of returning his predecessor to the Coalition frontbench.

"The ministry will be the same after the election, as it is now," he said.

